maybe Schulenburg or somewhere in that area and
actually he I think he carpentered for a year or so
before he came in and went to college here at A&M and
so he he ran his his department somewhat he ran his
department different I tried to run mine by
setting example and having people do try to do what
I was doing by example he ran his kind of like you'd
run the army and he had him jumping around pretty
now the nickname for him was mom Samang yeah well
that was with the students yes they referred to him
as mom Samang I'm not sure I guess he took pretty
good care of the students dr. Lindsay used to just
spend his time all time with students helping them
with degree program and I think that's a real
important thing to do and I think today they've got
one of our problems is we've got people helping
students a degree program don't even know never
took some of the courses and really don't have we
don't then that's one of the most important
features you're dealing with people's lives and
this is where we ought to have I had old dr. Harris
and he had the patience of job helping those people
WD Harris in in chemical engineering he I put him in
charge of that instead of my doing it I put him in
charge of because he had more patience than I did
you and dr. Lindsay came by one day and he says
Charles I want to congratulate you you finally put
Don Harris to work I never could get him to work like
that and he came over there and old Don was in there
just taking his time there's a whole line of
students out there waiting for him but he treated
every one of them and gave him his very best opinion
and if you've got a kid in school you surely
appreciate somebody like that all right in those
years in for an undergraduate in chemical
engineering what were the key courses key
undergraduate courses for those students oh they
took unit operations and thermodynamics much the
same as taken now it really these fundamental
things really don't change all that much and we got
we introduced process control after in early
fifties that was introduced by bleed GL fair then
we in that group also introduced chemical
engineering ultras say program engineering and
it kind of Kinetics and Catalysis, one of the first
schools in the country to do that. And so ours got
those, they had Unit Operations Laboratory and so
on. Unit Ops was one of them that they used a lot. Dr.
Lindsay taught a course in organic chemistry, and
he kind of waited, he kind of threw the grades and
let, threw the papers and let the step they landed
on determine the grade. That's kind of, and some of
them would really complain because he also looked
and see which student needed the grade, helped him
determine it was. According to the students, what
were the toughest courses for them to pass? Which
ones? Well, I imagine one of the first ones in those
years was the very first one, the Industrial
Stoichiometry course, and after that probably
the Thermal course. And I've taught, I've taught
every, see all the time I was department head, I
taught one or two courses, and I've taught all the
graduate courses over there, and I've taught all
the undergraduate. I believe every last one of
them, they've added one or two now that I haven't
taught, but basically I had to teach a lot when we
didn't, because we had, there were three of us
there, Dr. Harris, Dr. Lindsay, and me, two full
professors and assistants. Well, who had the
heavy load? I was teaching about all, everything,
but it didn't, it stood me in good stead later
because I was, I had information and knowledge in
all those fields when I'd go doing research. I
could pull on thermometers. I could pull on a
thermo or any of the others. You mentioned Smang as
one of your key associates as a department head.
Who were some of the others? Well, Al Cronk was one.
Chris Browneman was first head of technology over
there.
Charlie Crawford, I think he was, he won the, he was
head when I became head. Bob Whiting was head.
And I believe Mr. Langford sat in. Yeah. He was on
the, he may have still been head whenever I became
head, but they had several after that.
Let's see, then Jim Earl came along after Street.
Those were the main ones, but I knew the department
heads over in agriculture. Let me just tell you
something. I'm not, I know you probably figure
that the faculty senate is the way to do it, because
a lot of them do. But I have, I think that the prime
minister approach that we had back in those years
is far superior. Because all the faculty senates
turned out to be as an advisory council to the
president. And what we had in those years was what
was like the prime minister where the leader has to
come in and face the music. And you've got all the
people that have got authority there. And then if
there's a question, the faculty is the one that
ends up settling it. Because they'll appoint a
committee. But it was a chance to see whether you
got. Yeah. And Rudder withstood that. He handled
that. What I've found doesn't work about a faculty
senate is that they don't take responsibility for
their recommendations. They don't. They
recommend that somebody else do something and
they walk away. I know it. And I've always wondered
why couldn't we kind of combine the two where we
would have an advisory group, that's, I mean a
group that's appointed. Yeah. And a group that's
elected and they have to work it out together.
Well, I think having the department heads in there
and the deans is really critical. Because these
are the people that really have to make it all work.
Those are the people that are really responsible
for running the university. And anything you do,
you need to get all their approvals. And the way it
is, we don't have that joint meeting that they had
then because we knew what they were doing over in
agriculture, their feelings on anything. And I
think that was a big mistake. When we went from, to
being, and let me just say, while I'm saying about
that, and the reason we went, I think, is because
all the other universities are doing it. We need to
be like everybody else. And that's what irritates
me today, is to hear we want to be like so and so. We
want to be like them. Well, you're never going to be
number one. Being like somebody, the best you can
ever be is number two. And what I believe is we are so
unique and always have been that we ought to be
ourselves. Yeah. And do the things that we think
are best for us and our country, regardless of what
these rankings turn out. Because those rankings
they're turning out, you're beginning to see now,
there's a lot of criticism of them in the journals.
They don't mean much. But everybody just throws
them at one another, and they're always talking
about how good so and so is, how good so and so is. And
instead of talking about it, they ought to be out
doing something. All right. Back in the early 60s,
you and I served together on that Century 6. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I remember there was one
study where we were to make recommendations as to
what we thought A&M ought to aspire to be in 1976.
Summarize, as you recall, what that group did and
how it operated. Well, I think they had different
task force that were making different studies.
And I was one under Gus Watkins, who was then Dean of
Agriculture. And I think Gus was the one thing I
remember. remember, because that was the hottest
topic there was in those years, was the Corps
Cadets. And we thought the Corps was a good thing,
but we didn't think it ought to be compulsory. And
we made that recommendation, and I think old
Watson hated to go up with it, but we did. And I don't
know, that overshadows the other thing that we
looked at, and I don't remember what all those were
so much that, and I've forgotten, probably about
that same time we're concerned about having women
here, and of course that would have been another
issue, and they would have been opening it up for
women, too. And we felt like that for us to, if we did
not do that, we were going to dwindle down to a
little 2,000 student a year military college. Do
you remember, in your working days, working
group, task force, sometimes we called it a
working party, do you remember anybody
disagreeing with that recommendation? There
wasn't anybody in our committee that did. I didn't
remember either. But old Gus was a little bit
wavery sometimes, and I think actually he may have
got sent down on some of those South American trips
because of him turning in what he turned in. I don't
know. Do
you remember what the argument was? What the
arguments were, other than that it wouldn't be, we
wouldn't grow in enrollment. You remember any
other arguments? Well, it just wouldn't be a first
class university. We'd just be a little military
school and then be, that's what it would be noted
for, that we just would not have the impact that we
should have on the state of Texas if we got down to
just simply a military school. In one of the early
drafts that I wrote to summarize all of that, that
it got to a point, uh-huh. That it got edited out, I
think, I think I put in a phrase that we were afraid
that if we don't make these changes, we may end up
very much like VMI or the Citadel. Citadel, we had
exactly the same thing. That, uh, would end up, uh,
They didn't want to run them down, I guess. Do you
remember, do you remember anybody being afraid to
speak for that? There wasn't anybody in our
committee. Well, see, it was up to Gus. Gus was the
only one that might have had a problem. We were
telling him what to say. And so, you can get a little
bit of a stronger position about it if you don't
have to make the statement yourself to them. But I
think that group would have stood on what they
felt. There just wasn't that, I mean, it was a
pretty evident thing because you see, we had done
everything Rutter had tried for, wanted us to do.
We went over and canceled those corps, you know,
to, you know, to, you know, to, you know, to, you
know, to try to help them and do all that thing and
still it didn't grow. It just went up very
gradually and we just weren't making it. And so, we
did everything that he could think of that, that,
uh, to try to, try to make it go the way it was and it
just wouldn't do it. As you recall, when the, uh,
board, then it was called Board of Directors, now
Board of Regents. When they approved the changes,
do you remember how you and other faculty members
reacted? What was your impression? No, I really
don't. Uh, I, I guess I just felt like it was, it, it
had to come. Uh, I guess the thing that really
surprised me, well, it didn't surprise me at all,
but my conclusion was it would take somebody like
Rutter, who, uh, the former students could look at
and say if, if that man, as strong as he was for the
corps and all the things he did, if he thinks it
ought to go that way, then we're going to have to go
along with his decision, I think. I think that's
what it took to get somebody with his credibility
to do it. And I'll tell you, I've been over there two
different summers, uh, where Pointe du Hoc and
looked at, been in that, uh, in that dugout there
and they've got inscribed and the, the guide the
last time I was there, she had more to say. In fact,
there's more said about him and all the guides and
everything, anybody else. It's not Eisenhower
and them, it's him. And they have a big discussion
about him on all the tour guides going in there. Let
me add, for the sake of this tape, when I first met
General Omar Bradley, was, uh, at the Sun Bowl game
about January 1, 1981 in El Paso. I had just gone out
there. He was old physically, meaning he was in a
wheelchair, couldn't walk, but his brain was
still young. He looked up at me and said, you're
from Texas A&M. Yes, sir. Uh-huh. Did you know Earl
Rudder? Yes, sir. I worked with him. His voice
broke a little and he said, in all of my 48 years of
command responsibility, I never gave a tougher
order to any officer than the one I gave to Earl in
his outfit the night before D-Day because if they
hadn't got, made it successfully up Pointe du Hoc
and knocked out the German artillery, we would
have had a massacre on both Omaha and Utah. Well, I
didn't understand what he meant until I saw Pointe
du Hoc two or three years later and realized, yes.
Uh-huh. Well, you know that, uh, I've, I've heard
that same thing from, uh, that he'd said it before.
Uh, it's in some print or some, uh, news somewhere,
uh, that this was the toughest assignment that
anybody had during World War II. And, uh, so he was
really revered over there. They left that thing
just the way it was. How much did you and your
colleagues in engineering, how often, how much
did you all see of Mr. Rudder while he was
president? I saw him a lot more. Not, he didn't run
over there much. But, see, when people would give
us money, uh, I would, uh, he would, we would always
go to his office. And so he got to see everybody. And
I got rel, well acquainted. We'd sit down and shoot
the breeze a while and then we'd go eat lunch
together. Uh-huh. In fact, I had lunch with him
over there. I had lunch with him over in, uh, over in
that, uh, Sabisa Hall, that dining room. Just a few
days, he'd already had a stroke. And I could tell
his lip was kind of, wasn't moving much. And I
thought there was something wrong with him. But I
got to know him real well. And, uh, old Fred said,
told me one time, he says, you know, I had a hell of a
job selling you to Rudder. But I was just talking to
him the other day and he said, boy, he's sure high on
you now. Ha, ha, ha. Ha, ha. Ha, ha. Ha, ha. But, uh,
no, I got to know him real well and, uh, because we
met so many different times. And he liked, he is
different than some of the presidents. He wanted
to know what was going on on the outside world. What
the businesses people were doing, what they were
thinking. That was one of the reasons he liked to
eat with these, these people that were giving us
money. He wanted to, to get their viewpoints on
things. And I, I think that he was not true. I think
he was a man of the house. But you were not turned on
by eggheads. Oh, he wasn't. He wasn't. He told Fred
one, and Fred told me this. It was, they were, I
remember there at one time, I had a hard time there
running that department. I had so much help from
Charlie Squires and old Andy Sutton, all those
guys knew so much more than anybody else. And, and
old Squires knew so much about everything that he
couldn't run physics but one year. Ha! But,
anyway. Um, Fred told me this. No, he was in, he was
in naphtha. told me this, that they ran out of a
department head over there in physics. And Mr.
Rutter, you know what his background was. He had
all these people over there who were big theorists
and so forth, and he called them in there in his
office over in that old administration building,
and he said, we need to pick up a department head
from among you people.
Which one of you would make a good department head?
And he said, I've never heard people run one
another down so much in all my life. And he said,
they concluded there wasn't any of them fit to be
department heads. But here he was. He
outmaneuvered that bunch of so-called eggheads
just so far ahead of them in his way. That's the way
it ended up. But they, they couldn't, they
couldn't handle the situation. He handled it. All
right, you mentioned two men, Squire and Suttle.
Go back and describe for this recording Dr.
Suttle. Who was he and what was his task? Well, he
came from Mississippi, and he worked under Liddy
for his PhD. And he also worked down at Exxon. At
their research lab. And I was talking with some of
the Exxon people in research, and they said he was
the only guy down there never written a report all
the time he was there. And then I had one year, to
give you a really feel about it, I had Jim Galloway,
who's one of our former students, about the class
of 20-something, and he was head of all production
for Humboldt Oil and Refining Company. And
Charlie Jones, whom I'd met the summer I worked
down there and got acquainted with. I had him come
up and speak to the engineering faculty. And so as
we were going from the airport over to the, I was
going to take him over and let him visit Rutter. And
as we were going from the airport,
they said, well, we'll run by and see Andy just run
through his office. They said, by the way, what do
you think of him? I said, well, you know, he's
probably done some good and some bad. I hear he came
to us highly recommended from Exxon. See, they
want to get rid of you. Old Charlie said, well, he is
a great scientist. And then old Jim Galloway said,
yeah, he's a great scientist. And so he said, well,
we'll just, he said, Charlie says, you know, he is
an odd duck, isn't he? So they said, well, we'll
just kind of run through his office and then go on in
and talk to Rudder. Now, his task was, he was vice
president for research. I really don't know what
his job was. He had an office over there, kind of an
advisor. And Fred Smith told me another funny one
on him. You knew Fred Smith that taught geology?
Well, he had advised students every once in a
while. And according to Fred, they had some of
these science students up here. And one of them
wanted to talk to a real authority about nuclear
energy. And so who else would be better than
somebody that worked under Liddy? So they lined
him up over there. But when she called him up, the
girl did, he made an appointment at night over in
his office. And it just had this lady running the
dorms just all upset about it. And when she went to
Rudder with it, that he'd had that girl over there
at night. And Rudder went, they said, went
storming down the hall. That's the second damn
mistake he's made this week.
But I always had a lot of help with how I ought to be
running the department from both Squires and Andy
Suttle. Right now, did Squires succeed Andy as
vice president? No, actually they were both here
at the same time, and Squires was kind of working
over in the science and Andy was kind of over in the
system.
They got along very well together, but they were
always telling everybody else how to run their
business. They were going to help Rutter improve
A&M College, Texas A&M University. All right,
let's see, let's go back to Wayne Hull as vice
president for research. I guess when you became, I
mean vice president for academic affairs, when
you became a department head. Well he had it. He had
been a department head in science, I mean in plant
science, and then he moved up to become, and he held
that for a long time. And then he succeeded by
Coonsey. No, yeah, Coonsey was a graduate dean. A
graduate dean, well that's what Hull was for a long
time. Hull was a graduate dean. He was both. He was
both. He was both. Vice president for academic and
graduate dean. Oh, okay. Well I used to meet with
him. I used to serve on those committees. In fact,
one of the first committees I served on was with, I
used to serve on the curriculum committee when I
served with Heaton, Al Chalk, and Mr. Godby, if you
remember back that far. We were on, and old Ty Timm
was turning courses into us every time you flipped
a switch, he had a course in. Ty Timm. Ty Timm did.
Yeah. Who did, in those days, campus wide, who do
you think were the most influential people other
than, than Mr. Rudder? Whose opinion did Mr.
Rudder listen to? Oh, I think he took, I think he
took Benson's opinion over most all the others.
Okay. And I don't know he asked it, I don't know
whether he took it, because Benson told me that if
somebody from outside criticized me, jump, jump,
jump. Jump through his asshole. We better take
that off. But he said that, you know, if they said
anything, he didn't, he didn't always accept it,
but he accepted stuff on the outside more. But I
think he was, I think Benson was the one he always
turned to on about all the problems. Now, those, I
as a junior faculty member in history, I and my
buddies heard that of the four deans, the only two
that really had a vote that mattered was the Dean of
Engineering and the Dean of Agriculture. Uh-huh.
I imagine that. That Arts and Sciences didn't
matter much and Vet Medicine was so small. Yeah.
And that Benson, serving through a long time as
Dean of Engineering, that he mattered most.
Uh-huh. Now, you served as department head for how
long? Twenty-three years, from 64 to 87. Wouldn't
you be, wouldn't, you were the senior department
head? Yeah. By far, weren't you? Yeah. Um.
Actually, the only, the biggest reason they
wanted to get rid of him is because he had served 23
years. And I mean, they were really on me to, uh, you
get to a point where regardless of what you did,
they're still going to be after you. And I had told
them I was going to retire in August of 87. And they
were having some awards meeting up there. And I
said,
well, Charlie,
why don't you just step down right now and we can
start hunting. I mean, not right now, but step down
here in a month or two and then we can start looking
for a new department head. I said, well, I told you I
was going to step down in August. What's wrong with
that? Well, we could just do so much better if you'd
just step down. And I said, well, I did. And I said,
well, I don't care to until the time allocated. And
so they got Richardson in there and they went at it
again. I said, when Richard's, I said, if you want
me to step down so damn bad, I'll quit this minute.
Do you want it? And that was the end of it. He didn't
want it that fast. And so I had, uh, I served on until
exactly when I told them I was ready to step down.
All right. Let's, let's go back. Mr. Rudder. Mr.
Rudder dies in early 1970 arranged for him to give a
paper over in, uh, uh, I believe it was Atlanta and
I'd written it on continuing education. And I went
in to see him and he, he, I believe it was really
dragging on him. Cause he said, Charlie, I just
don't see how I can do this. I said, sure. You can do
it. All you gotta do is read it. I'll write the dang
thing. All you got to do it. Read it. And Morgan was,
used to be here as president was the one that was,
had asked me to give him, uh, get some, get him to
give a paper. And, uh, so it turned out that Fred
Benson had to read it. He had the stroke before that
occurred. So I'd just been over his office a little
before that. All right. Then we briefly had Clyde
Freeman, I believe it is, as the interim and then
Jack Williams. Let's see. No, uh, we had, uh,
Ludeke. Oh, I'm sorry. General. General Ludeke.
General Ludeke. General Ludeke. Yes. Uh huh. Yes.
Um, did Ludeke have any, did you have any
interaction with him? Oh yeah. He asked me to look
into this faculty club and I looked all over the
place and found out that unless you had drinks, if
you wanted one to make profit, you're going to have
to have something like that. And another thing
that I asked him to do, and it was already too late. I
said that way, that thing is designed over there.
You can't have a meeting in it and it needs to be to
where you can have all the people in there. So, uh,
something in the faculty club that's a dinner of
some sort where you have a speaker and that way you
can, it can make money that way. And he said, well,
it's too late to change it. And he wanted me to, uh,
and I did and I finally just reported to him that,
that, uh, I didn't think that they could not make a
go of it, uh, unless they had some, and they, it's,
I've been proven correct. I was, I was a junior
member of that committee. Uh-huh. For that, all of
that expansion of the MSC and the Rudder Tower. And
I was arguing the same thing as you because the
faculty club on the 11th and 12th floors, each of
those little dining areas is so small that you
can't get enough people in one place. Uh-huh. And
so I told them that and it wasn't. But the
architect, uh, his. They, somebody saw it, one in
Dallas like that. And I think I've eaten in that one
in Dallas. Uh-huh. And that's the way they wanted
it designed. That's the reason it got designed
that way. Yeah. And Rudder, and, uh, Ludeke said,
well, it's just too late, you know, to change it.
And he accepted it. He just didn't like it much, but
he, I just told him, you know, we just can't, uh,
it's hard enough to get people to go out at night and
eat anyway. What would you, what, uh, description
would you give of the manner in which he filled in as
the interim president? Oh, I think he's, I think he
was an excellent individual. I think General
Ludeke is one of the top. One of the top people that,
uh, and actually Fred told me that General Rudder
got him, uh, just hired him. And Fred said, I tried
to get him to take Ludeke and let him help him
administer, and he wouldn't do it. He wanted to do
it all himself. And so he gave him to me, but, uh, he
ran the station. I worked for him some under there,
but he was really, uh, uh, a nice individual.
Describe his, uh. Very. Low key, but very
definite. I sat with him on committee meetings and
he didn't, uh, throw his former rank or anything
around. And, uh, in fact, I was just over
interviewing the, uh, transportation
department. His son is named Al Ludeke and he's a
head of all planning over there. And I didn't know
about it until I called over there. The same Al
Ludeke. Here? He went to A&M, but his son, Al
Ludeke's son is also named Al Ludeke and he's
running the planning division of the Texas, uh,
Transportation Department, TxDOT. And I went
over and we had an interview with him and, uh, and,
uh. The few times I was in his office, I never saw a
more orderly, cleaner desk. Everything seemed to
be in order, uh, and, uh, with me, he asked very few
questions, but they were always very specific. He
was very skillfully planned and he seemed to be an
extremely good listener. Mm-hmm. Well, you see,
what happened was that after the war, the, uh,
Atomic Energy Commission, they put him in, he was
running that, but you never heard of him. He
doesn't, he wasn't out there making a lot of
racket. Mm-hmm. Then they had trouble with that,
uh, lab, that space laboratory out in, uh,
Stanford. And so they sent him out there and they,
they'd been screwing up when he got out there. It
started to work. Yeah. And so everywhere he went,
he was able to solve the problems and he didn't make
a big stir about it. So I, I like. He was a Chemical
Engineering graduate, class of 1932. Now, he came
back after serving as Interim President. He came
back to Engineering. Is that right? Yeah, no, he
was serving in Engineering before he ever became,
But, I mean, he went over to the President then?
Well, I'm not really sure he ever really served any
over there. I think that was just a discussion
before. And then whenever, when Rutter died, they
took him out of engineering and made him acting
president. All right, but then after Williams
came, he came back over to... He may have, I don't
really remember. Jack Williams came. Describe
your impressions of Jack Williams as president.
Well, I think he was the man for that time. I'm
not really sure that I'd, I don't know that I'd rank
him anywhere near Rutter. I think Rutter's one of
the best ones in here, that's ever been here, but
yet I would have given him the poorest chances when
he came of anybody we've ever had.
But I think Jack did a good job as president, and
because of his academic background, he could see
what was needed. I think anything that he did...